# Grading Guideline for Project 1 --- Lexical Analyzer

## Rubrics

- 1 for each unit test in `test_p1` ==> totally 100 points
- -5 if you forget to return tok at the end of any non-void function (identifier(), 
string(), special(), and number()).

## Submission

Submit `lexanc.c` and/or any other files you have modified.

## Testing

Your code will be tested by tokens extracted from `scantst.pas`, `graph1.pas`, 
`trivb.pas`, and `pasrec.pas`. 
The sample output files for `scantst.pas` and `graph1.pas` are `scantst.sample` and 
`graph1.lex`.
You can run your lexer as follows
```
make lexanc
./lexanc < scantst.pas # This will print the output to the stdout
./lexanc < scantst.pas > scantst.output # This will save the output into scantst.output
```
Then you can compare the outputs using `diff` or any online diff checkers.


## Autograding

Your submissions will be graded by an autograder.
To facilitate the grading process, individual unit test files containing different 
tokens are used for grading. 
The input files are stored in `test_p1` folder in the autograder repo. 
The samples are stored in `sample_p1`. 
The filename of the unit test indicates where the code comes from.

To run the autograder on your code, try the following steps:

1. Download the autograder repo from https://github.com/zhanglx13/CS375_Compilers_Autograder.
   Remember to update the autograder to the latest version regularly. 
2. **Copy `printtoken.c` from `/cs375_minimal/` into your workingDir**.
3. cd into the downloaded autograder folder and run
```
./grade.sh -p 1 -d workingDir
```
where `workingDir` is the path name of your working directory.

The autograder uses an updated version of the `talloc()` function, which is defined
in `printtoken.c`.
The new `talloc()` function will initialize the token explicitly to some weird 
values so as to make it easier for you to detect bugs when you construct a token.
The new `talloc()` function is as follows
```c
TOKEN talloc()           /* allocate a new token record */
{ 
    TOKEN tok;
    tok = (TOKEN) calloc(1,sizeof(struct tokn));
    if ( tok != NULL ){
        tok->tokentype = 9999;
        tok->basicdt = 9999;
        /*
         * In this way, the initial value of the union becomes
         *
         * string: ################
         * int/which: 589505315
         * real:   0.00000
         *
         * The point of doing so is that now the string
         * does not have any '\0' initially. Therefore,
         * if '\0' is not explicitly placed in the string.
         * the string won't stop when being printed.
         */
        for (int i=0; i<16; i++)
            tok->stringval[i]=35;
        return (tok);
    }
    else {
        printf("talloc failed."); return 0;
    }
}
```

The output of the autograder should be intuitive.
You will see "All Good!!" if all tokens in the test are 
correctly processed by your lexer. 
Otherwise, the `diff` output will be printed.

**The autograder uses clang to compile your parser and runs on the cs machine.**
To use `clang` to compile your parser, you can also copy `makefile` in `/cs375_minimal/`
into your working dir. 
This `makefile` is a compact version of the original `makefile` provided in the `cs375`
directory.

### On MacOS

There might be some issues when running the autograder on your MacOS. 
You should always test your code and the autograder on the CS machine.
If you really want to run it on your Mac, here are some note that might help.

The autograder uses `gnu-sed`,`gnu-grep`,and `gnu timeout` to process the output of your lexer.
However, MacOS has different implementations of these tools.
To solve this issue, you need to install gnu versions of these tools and set them as default.
You can follow 
[this link](https://gist.github.com/andre3k1/e3a1a7133fded5de5a9ee99c87c6fa0d) for sed,
[this link](https://apple.stackexchange.com/a/193300) for grep, and
[this link](https://stackoverflow.com/a/21118126/4080767) for timeout.

## Notes

- You can safely assume that integer and floating number overflow and underflow
are the only errors in the input files.
- For scientific numbers in `scantst.pas`, the 6th digit after the decimal point
is accepted to be off by 1. 
E.g. for line 34 in `scantst.pas` both 3.141592e+06 and 3.141593e+06 are acceptable
outputs.
- You do not need to consider negative numbers.
- For integer overflows, the cut-off is exactly 2147483647. 
Everything larger than that is an overflow.
- For real numbers, the cut off is not exact. 
You can only consider the exponent, i.e. when the exponent is larger than 38, 
it is an overflow. 
When the exponent is smaller than -38, it is an underflow. 
However, this should be done after you have converted the number in the form `x.xxxxxxeyy`.
- You can run the following program on the cs machine to get an idea of the limits 
of integer and real numbers
```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <limits.h> // for UINT_MAX and INT_MAX
#include <float.h>  // for FLT_MAX, FLT_MIN, DBL_MAX, and DBL_MIN
int main()
{
    printf("unsigned int max: %u\n", UINT_MAX);
    printf("int max: %d\n", INT_MAX);
    printf("single floating point max: %e\n", FLT_MAX);
    printf("single floating point min: %e\n", FLT_MIN);
    printf("double floating point max: %e\n", DBL_MAX);
    printf("double floating point min: %e\n", DBL_MIN);
    return 0;
}
```
- On machines using a newer version of the linker (ld-2.34), ld complains about 
  multiple definition of `EOFFLG` and `CHARCLASS[MAXCHARCLASS]` in lexan.h and 
  scanner.c. You can delete the ones defined in scanner.c. 
  Note that an old version of ld-2.30, as installed on the CS machines, does not 
  complain about it.
