# Grading Guideline for Project 4 --- parsing graph1i.pas

## Rubrics

- Total points: 100
- 2 for each constant in the symbol table, 10 points in total.
- 2 for each constant (which should be replaced by its literal value) in the output tree, 10 points in total.
- 10 for the repeat construct.
- 10 for makefloat: for (float i), s*y, and round() + h.
- -2 for any extra float
- -2 for any extra fix
- If your parser works fine for trivb.pas, there should not be any other errors. If there is any, each costs 2 points.
- -2 for each token whose basicdt is incorrectly assigned (see details below).
- -5 for each bug caused by bad programming style. (see [details in the rubrics of project 3](https://github.com/zhanglx13/CS375_Compilers_Autograder/blob/master/rubrics/p3.md#bad-programming-styles))

`graph1i.pas` will be used as the input and your parsing output will be compared
with `graph1.sample`.
However, your parser's output might differ in the following ways:

- The order and addresses of symbols in the symbol table does not matter.
- For the parse tree, you can have extra `progns` but the parenthesis should always match.
Note that if you use `pprint.c` copied from the autograder repo, the extra `progns` 
are removed.
- Extra newlines or different indentation is also acceptable.
Note that if you use `pprint.c` copied from the autograder repo, the indentation before 
each line is removed.
- The following line in `graph1.sample` does not matter. 
You can control whether to print it by setting `DB_PARSERES`.
```
token 38058544  OP       program  dtype  0  link 0  operands 38050000
```
**You code will be compiled with clang and tested on the cs machine.**
To compile your parser with clang, copy `makefile` from `cs375_minimal` into your working dir.

## Submissions

- parse.y (for Yacc) or parsc.c (for C)
- lexan.l (If not found, the one from project 2 will be used)
- Any other files that you have modified.

## Autograding

Same as [project 3](https://github.com/zhanglx13/CS375_Compilers_Autograder/blob/master/rubrics/p3.md#Autograding)
except that the command for running the autograder should be 
```
./grade.sh -p 4 -d workingDir
```
You should make sure that `graph1i.pas` is in your workingDir.

**Remember to copy `printtoken.c`, `pprint.c`, and `print.h` from `cs375_minimal`
directory into your workingdir before running the autograder.**

## Notes

Make sure you read the [notes of project 3](https://github.com/zhanglx13/CS375_Compilers_Autograder/blob/master/rubrics/p3.md#Notes).

### Symbols in the symbol table level 1

- `d`, `s`, `h`, `c`, `lim` are constants, which should appear in the symbol table as CONSTSYM.
  You should set their types and values properly but their order in the symbol table does not matter.
  Note that you do not need to compute their offset as you do for the variables.
- `x`, `y`, `i`, `n` are variables, which should appear in the symbol table as VARSYM.
  You should set their types, sizes, and offsets properly. Their order in the symbol table does not matter.

### Token Type
Each token in the parse tree should have a type if its type is used later.
For numbers and ids with basic data type, their basicdt are assigned by the lexer. For binary operations, the operator's basicdt should also be properly assigned.
E.g. the parse tree for 3+5 is like follows
```
      +    // TOKEN plusTok
     /
    /
   3 ----- 5
```
Then you should have
```
plusTok->basicdt = INTEGER;
```
This is called **type propagation**. 
You also need to figure out the basicdt of funcall if the function returns a numeric value. (Hint: you can look up a function's name in the symbol table and obtain its return type accordingly. Make sure you read `symtab.txt`.)
Type propagation is the foundation of the success for type coercion. 
Make sure you get it right.
