# Grading Guideline for Project 6 --- code generation

**Your code will be checked for plagiarism against each other as well as some online 
github code using moss. 
If you get caught, you will get a 0 for this project.**

## Rubrics

1. There are 31 unit tests in `test_p6` directory.
2. The samples associated with each unit test can be found in the `sample_p6` directory.
3. The points for each unit test is shown in the table below.
4. You can get partial points (0.5, 1, 1.5, ...) if your output is partially correct.
5. The grade is based on these unittests. 
   You got points off if your output is wrong even it is caused by your parser 
   and/or lexer.
6. The grading is based on matching assembly code. 
   I will not run your assembly code. 
   However, the sample output is just a reference. 
   You may still get all points even if it looks different from the sample. 
   (Chances are you implement some optimizations, reorder some computations, have 
   a different symbol table so that the offset of vars are all different)
7. You might get extra points for clever optimizations.
8. I will grade your codegen on the **cs machine** using **clang** as the compiler. 


| Test No. | Points | Content                                |
| -------- | ------ | -------------------------------------- |
| 0-2      | 2x3    | genc-assign; genarith-id,num           |
| 3-10     | 3x8    | genarith-arithmeticop                  |
| 11       | 2      | genarith-float                         |
| 12       | 2      | genarith-negate                        |
| 13       | 2      | freereg-basic                          |
| 14-16    | 4x3    | genc-if,label,goto; genarith-<>,<=,=   |
| 17       | 2      | genfun-int->null                       |
| 18       | 3      | genfun-string->null; genarith-string   |
| 19       | 3      | genfun-int->ptr                        |
| 20       | 3      | genfun-real->real                      |
| 21       | 3      | genfun-real->int                       |
| 22       | 4      | save/restore reg                       |
| 23-24    | 5x2    | genaref-id                             |
| 25-26    | 6x2    | genaref-^                              |
| 27-28    | 5x2    | genaref-aref                           |
| 29-30    | 1x2    | freereg-extra                          |
| Total    | 100    |                                        | 


## Submissions

1. lexan.l   // if not found, the one from the project 2 will be used
2. parse.y   // if not found, the one from project 5 will be used
3. codegen.c // if not found, you will get a 0 for this project!!!
4. any other files that are modified.

## Autograding

To run the autograder against all unit tests, do
```
./grade.sh -p 6 -d workingDir
```

You can also run the autograder against a single test (this is the single test mode)
as
```
./grade.sh -p 6 -d workingDir -t tn
```
where `tn` is the test number.

**Remember to copy `printtoken.c`, `pprint.c`, and `print.h` from `cs375_minimal`
directory into your workingdir before running the autograder.**

### Autograder's Output

You will get all points for any unit test if you see the following:
```
==>  testNN (p)  All Good!!
```
where NN is the test number and p is the total points of this test.

If there is an error after the generated assembly code, the autograder will print
```
==> testNN (p) All Good!! <err message>
```
in which case, you will lose 0.5 points for this unit test.

There is a 5-second deadline for your compiler. If it takes more than 5 seconds
for your compiler to finish processing the input, the autograder will print
```
==> testNN (p) Program takes longer than $deadline seconds to finish!! <SIGTERM (Time out)>
```
without any further information about the unit test.
In this case, you will lose all `p` points for this unit test.

If your compiler does not generate any assembly code between `begin Your code` and
`begin Epilogue code`, the autograder will print
```
==> testNN (p) No Assembly Code Generated!! <error msg>
```
where `error msg` will tell you what the error message is.

If `begin Your code` is not even printed, the autograder will print
```
==> testNN (p) No Assembly Code Found!! <error msg>
```
where `error msg` will tell you what the error message is.
In the above two cases, you will lose all `p` points of this unit test.

The autograder may print detailed information according to the mode. 
See below sections.

#### DIFF section (both modes)

This section prints the difference between your output and the sample between 
`begin Your code` and `begin Epilogue code`. 
Check [here](https://github.com/zhanglx13/CS375_Compilers_Autograder/blob/master/rubrics/p5.md#outputs-of-other-unit-tests) to learn how to read the diff output.

If your compiler does not generate any assembly code, this section will not be printed.

#### My Output section (only single test mode)

If the autograder is running against a single test, the output will contain the 
result from running your compiler against the target unit test.
The result contains the parse tree and the assembly code.

#### Sample section (both modes)

If the autograder is running against all unit tests, the sample section only
contains assembly code between `begin Your code` and `begin Epilogue code` with
line numbers.

If the autograder is running against a single unit test, the sample section contains
all assembly code starting from `begin Your code` to the end.

#### Report section (both modes)

In this section, the output contains the following message:
```
wrong assembly code lines: x/y
```
where y is the total number of assembly lines between `begin Your code` and
`begin Epilogue code` in the sample code. x is the number of lines that is
incorrect in your output.

If literal data is incorrect in the Literal data section, the output also contains
the following message:
```
something wrong in literal data section
```

## Note

### General guide

A lot of bugs in your compiler will be in your parse.y. 
In codegen.c, you will pick a register (int, real, or pointer) according to a 
token's basicdt. 
If your compiler generates weird results, the first place to check is the value 
of the basicdt. 
If the value is 9999, it means the basicdt of the token is not properly set. 
Then you need to figure out which function in parse.y is responsible for setting 
the basicdt of the token. 

Some candidates:

1. in unaryop(), did you set the op's basicdt?
2. when dealing with NIL, did you set the token's basicdt to POINTER?
3. in reducedot() and arrayref(), did you set the basicdt of the arefop?

There might be other places that the basicdt is not properly set. 

### Effect of pprint.c on the generated code

I added two functions, `removeExtraProgn()` and `exprCanonicalization()`, in 
`ppexpr()` in pprint.c. 
These two functions change the structure of the parse tree, rather than doing some
tricks when printing the parse tree in `printexpr()`.
The intention of these two functions is to eliminate alternatives in the structure
of the parse tree so that it is easier for the autograder to do comparisons.
In addition, `exprCanonicalization()` can also affect the assembly code generated 
by the code generator, i.e. it can affect the number of register used.
I will use `test16.pas` as an example to illustrate how `exprCanonicalization()` 
reduces the number of registers used by the code.

The offset of the aref structure on the left hand side of the assignment is `48*i-48`. 
If the parser does not apply any policy on the look of the parse tree, the result 
if this offset can be
```
    +
   / \
-48   *
     / \
    48  i
```
When assigning registers for this subtree, -48 will be assigned to %eax, 
48 will be assigned to %ecx, and i will be assigned to %edx. 
Therefore, 3 registers are required to generate the assembly code.

What `exprCanonicalization()` does is to switch `-48` and `*` in the parse tree.
Therefore, the output is 
```
     +
    / \ 
   *  -48
  / \
 i  48
```
In this case, i will be assigned to %eax and 48 will be assigned to %ecx. 
Then the multiplication instruction will update %eax as the result of 48*i
and release %ecx.
As a result, -48 will be assigned to %ecx, thus reducing the total number of registers
required to 2.

Note that `exprCanonicalization()` also switches 48 and i, which does not affect 
the number of registers in the code.

It is assumed that `genarith()` will always work on the left child of an operator 
subtree first. 
The key to reduce the number of registers is to work on the **big** child first.

This version of `pprint.c` is used for grading only.
You can ignore it or comment out those two functions when you write and test your
code. 
If you happen to implement `genarith()` in the way that it works on the right child
first, you will not lose points for using more registers.

The last thing to note is that the parse tree manipulation functions work only when
```
ppexpr(parseresult);
```
is called in main() in parse.y. 
If you comment this function out in main(), the autograder will add it for grading
purpose only. 


### Running the `*.s` on MacOS

MacOS has a different assembler so some of the directives are not recognized. 

Quick fix:

1. Delete those three lines starting with .type, .size, and .section
2. Change graph1 to \_graph1, i.e. change the following two lines
```
.global graph1
graph1:
```
to 
```
.global _graph1
_graph1:
```
3. Change all
```
call fun@PLT
```
to 
```
call _fun
```
